We have one hour with you, so if you would like to start with an opening
statement, then great.
About three minutes.
Thank you.
Well, thank you, and good afternoon.
Today I have with me Nick Blakely, the CEO of the
Ministry of Business Innovation and Employment, the Electricity Authority CEO,
Sarah Gillies, and ED, Marcos Polania, who is here
with officials,
for the estimates. And I want to thank our members for their time.
As members know, energy powers the New Zealand economy.
It keeps our homes warm and our industries running, producing jobs
and opportunities across our economy.
New Zealand should be proud of the fact that an increasing amount of our
electricity is being produced by renewable sources.
However, our energy system also has significant challenges which this government is
focused on solving. The government's focus is to ensure New Zealand has abundant,
affordable, reliable, and increasingly renewable energy.
To achieve these objectives, the government has made a number of key decisions to
provide certainty to the market. We stopped the previous government's
Lake Onslow project, allowing the sector to move forward with its own investment
plans. We've put in place fast-track legislation to make
consenting faster and more cost-effective.
We removed the 100% renewable target by 2030, which was disincentivizing
investment in thermal backup energy for when the lakes are low.
And due to these policies, we're seeing real results.
Since coming into office, nearly one gigawatt of new renewable generation has been
brought online. More new generation has come online in the past three years than in
the previous eight years combined.
Future wholesale prices have fallen noticeably since we announced our decision to
procure an LNG importation terminal.
And in the last quarter of last year, a record 96% of the electricity generated in
New Zealand came from renewable sources.
However, there is more work to do, particularly with the significant reduction in
gas supply we have seen in recent years following the previous government's
decision to ban oil and gas exploration.
Ultimately, we need to ensure that when the lakes are low, the wind isn't blowing,
and the sun isn't shining, that we have a solution to provide the backup energy
needed in a dry year.
The energy gap that has been identified by MBIE in a dry year is approximately
three terawatt hours of electricity.
Thanks to the Huntly firming options, half of this is covered by the coal
stock-pilot Huntly. However, we need another 1.5 terawatt hours to provide
that backup.
After significant analysis and examining a range of options, MBIE has advised that
the most cost-effective and fastest option is to procure an
LNG importation terminal. The government is acting on this advice.
With a dry year expected every four years and the last one hitting in
2024, we don't have the luxury of time to spend another 10 years
building a lake at the bottom of the South Island to solve this problem.
We must act now, and we must act decisively.
That is precisely why we are procuring an LNG importation terminal alongside
putting in place an obligation on the major generator retailers that they must
manage the dry year risk, with significant fines if they don't.
Alongside this decision, the government is investing in practical support to secure
New Zealand's energy needs. Budget '26 invest in supporting industrial gas users to
convert from gas to other forms of energy with the loan guarantee scheme,
freeing up gas for those who need it the most.
Supporting investment and putting solar panels in schools to reduce schools'
electricity costs and increase resilience.
Providing for resilience from the Middle East conflict with investment in strategic
diesel reserve, which has been established in record time with diesel flowing to
those tanks this week.
In addition, the government is making it easier to install rooftop solar,
modernizing energy efficiency rules, and enabling technologies like EV
charging, giving consumers more control over their power bills, strengthening
competition, and ensuring strong, effective regulation.
There is a lot going on, and we need to stay the course to make electricity more
abundant, more affordable, and reliable to underpin economic growth
and help New Zealanders get ahead. And with that, I'm happy to take questions.
Thank you, Minister. And we start with Honorable Megan Woods.
Thank you. Thank you, Minister. Minister, you're
familiar, I'm sure, with Concept Consulting's market
modeling that concludes that New Zealand faces no imminent physical
gas deliverability crisis and there's no urgent physical need
for an LNG terminal by 2028 to meet that
non-petrochemical demand. Have you received this
advice?
I've seen advice from consulting that was provided to the Ministry of Business
Innovation and Employment.
Ultimately, the Ministry of Business Innovation and Employment has taken into
account
a range of pieces of advice in order to look at the dry
year risk and what's required to fill that gap.
And the reality is the most recent data
shows that the gas reserves reduced by another 23%
in the last year. That advice was released only, I think, from
MBIE last month.
And that indicates another significant downgrade in our gas
availability as a country. And due to that, the risk
only increases. The other point that
I would make is that we have a choice around-- or we have a real
issue here around with the Maui field expected to
close shortly, and with that, potentially,
Methanex.
And through that, we lose the ability to have that flexibility which the New
Zealand energy market has
relied on for many, many years, which is when we
have a dry year,
we have the ability to have a large gas user to be able to effectively turn off
their production and for that gas to be able to shift across to electricity use.
So-
Without a major user like that
The system becomes incredibly inflexible, and the alternative is
effectively many, many industrial businesses having to turn
off during a dry year. And that is economic destruction.
It's called demand destruction. That's jobs, that's businesses being shut
down, jobs being destroyed.
And that's not a future I think that anyone around this table wants for the New
Zealand economy. And so the reality is that we have to make decisions.
We've been advised of the 1.5 terawatt hour
gap that needs to be filled. How we've been advised that the most cost effective
and fastest solution to fill that is to have an LNG
importation terminal. We are pursuing that in order
to make sure that we protect our economy, put downward pressure on power bills,
and make sure we fill the gap left by the dry year risk.
So supplementary to that, and the concept modeling that I've seen
takes into account the latest gas figures, I believe.
So have been updated to take those into account.
But their modeling, and I'm sure you will have seen it too, Minister,
estimates that forcing the LNG terminal into the system
adds around $6.2 billion in present value costs to the New
Zealand economy, and that's an undiscounted sum of
around $24 billion, while largely benefiting
gas pipeline and field owners. So what
modeling has the minister seen that has
convinced him to go ahead with this when he has-
Well-
... commissioned modeling by his own officials that put, puts a cost to
the New Zealand economy of $6 billion?
Well, firstly, MB took-- looked at the dry year risk and
went through a range of options from the cabinet paper.
It's all been released before. You've seen it, I'm sure.
We referred to you that information in written questions as well, so, and in the
house. So it's all available online for you to read about
all of the options that were considered around how we can address this risk.
And one of the points which I think the member is ignoring is the fact that this is
not something that can be solved in 2037.
We have a dry year risk every four years on average.
We don't have the luxury to wait till 2037
to build a $16 billion lake at the bottom of the South Island, which
was what that member proposed to do when she was last in government.
We don't have that luxury.
So supplementary-
We have a, we have a, we have a risk in front of us that needs to be
addressed, it needs-- requires decisions to be made, uh, and MB's analysis is
that the fastest and cheapest option before us is to have an LNG
importation terminal. And something which ultimately
will provide the energy that's needed into, into our system.
So we are solving a problem which the previous member
ignored, uh, and we're providing it, and, uh, and, and
ultimately we're al- we have already seen a significant
reduction in wholesale prices on the forward market,
uh, following the decision that we made as a government.
We'll come to your conflation of correlation with causation in a moment, but
supplementary question. So, um, the minister's saying he
doesn't agree with the concept modeling, um, and that his
official-
Well, I've received advice from MB-
No, sorry, Minister, I'll finish my question.
Hold on, hold on, hold on. Yeah, okay. Finish your question.
I'll finish my question.
But you're making an assertion.
Um, well, I'm paraphrasing from you, you Minister.
You're saying you d- that you don't agree and your officials didn't agree with the
concept, uh, modeling, which for the record-
I provided the advice
... you did not provide to us in written questions.
You redacted it because you didn't want it out there.
Uh, no, sorry. Sorry, you've got-
Sorry. I will hold on, member.
There are certain-
Hold on. No, I listen-
... all sorts of conjecture into a conversation.
I think you have the opportunity to ask a supplementary question.
Ask a question and get an answer.
Will he please release the advice, the modeling from
MB that, that, um, that, um, negates what
concept he has modeled in terms of the six, the $6 billion
cost to the New Zealand economy, and why he thinks it's a good
idea to push ahead with something that is so clearly going
to cost the country jobs and higher energy costs, because
that's what his own official's commissioned modeling shows.
Uh, well, the member is wrong. The member-
Well-
... is completely wrong because we, uh-
I'm not
... firs- firstly, uh, what we are doing is protecting jobs by
ensuring we have the energy needed in our economy.
Um, the member's, the member's option that she is, is saying is,
"Don't do anything. Ignore the dry year risk." Uh, and I'm
sorry, but I-- we saw what happened following her time as
Minister of Energy. It hit in 2024.
Me- the, the, the spot price hit $800 a megawatt
hour, uh, in, in 2024. We suffered
huge economic devastation following eight,
six years while she was the minister and while she failed to
actually address the risk which she knew about when she was in charge.
So-
The cost to our economy, about $5.2 billion
last year. Jobs, businesses were shut.
The Ty Smelter went, uh, obviously it was good that they had the demand response,
but ultimately that's less production and that's less GDP for our economy.
That is the direct result of ignoring the problem, something this government
will not do.
So supplementary. Supplementary.
In the information you did release with your Cabinet paper, that
you go through the scenarios that, that your officials did look at,
one of which was, um, the Rankin option.
Um, it was shown to, to have, um, a cost between
$150 to $170 a megawatt hour for coal and
180 to 215 a megawatt hour for
biomass scored the highest on there.
What I'm interested in is why locking in new
significant generation capacity in that option was ruled
as a negative in your assessment in the Cabinet paper.
Well, there's two points I'd make.
Firstly, the time it would take to build a new Rankin unit would
take, uh, significantly longer than to put in place an
LNG importation terminal Which was considered
important. And timeliness is important here because on average,
we expect to have, on average, a dry year every four years.
The second part-
Sorry, just to clarify, minister, I'm not asking about timing, I'm asking about the
generation.
The second-- I said two points, so I'm happy to keep answering.
The minister finished his answer.
Yeah.
Well, the bit on the generation, not the timing.
Yeah. But they're both important points to-
It's a different part of the matrix
... yeah, they're both important points to your question.
Members, can I just say this, that for Hansard, I want to make sure it's only one
person speaking at a time. Please don't talk over another person.
So minister is answering. Please, Minister, can you carry on from there?
Yeah. So the first point is obviously the time it takes to build.
The second is around
the long-term duration of the assets is
obviously a factor in terms of
the time when... If you look at the modeling, the modeling
suggests that, as we have greater build of renewables, which
is enabled by LNG, ultimately the need for that
thermal backup does reduce over time.
A new Rankine is a 50-year asset, whereas an LNG importation
terminal doesn't need to be. And so there's a difference in the timing and
what's required by the asset. So that's the point in terms of those factors that
have been considered by MB and the options analysis.
But I bring it back to the first point I was making, which is actually critically
important, which is on average, we have a dry year every four
years. The last one was in 2024. The next one could be,
on average, would be expected around 2028.
We actually have to make decisions which address this issue quickly and in a timely
manner, otherwise, we risk economic carnage on our economy,
something the previous minister was prepared to have, something I am not.
All right. Supplementary Scott Willis.
Thank you, Madam Chair. We certainly don't want to see any more economic carnage
that's been happening under this government, but what I'm really interested in is
the, um,
the minister having removed the levy off all electricity users to
pay for LNG,
how will the minister pay for LNG? Is the minister going
to compel the gen tailers to purchase
LNG? Is this the way in which the import terminal will be
paid for?
Well, firstly,
as I said in my speech last week to the Auckland Business Chamber, we won't be
putting a levy on people's power bills,
because that's not the right way to pay for this.
The
dry year risk sits with the electricity generators
and retailers. And that's the point of, in
addition to what we're doing here,
of putting in place the dry year regulatory framework to actually make it very
clear where the risk lies,
and to put obligations in place clearly on those electricity
generators and retailers,
to manage that risk. That is their job. That's what they should be doing.
Secondly,
we have said very clearly that we will require them to pay for it.
We have MB and NIFCO currently in
negotiations with them around a funding model to enable them to do that, and we've
said we'll have a regulatory backstop in place if they
fail to come to an agreement.
So is the minister saying whether or not the gen tailers
see LNG as necessary, they will pay for it?
Well, we've been through a period of time where we've assessed the
options,
and we've come to the conclusion this is the most cost effective and
fastest way to deal with this issue.
The gen tailers have not resolved the dry year
regulatory risk over a very long
period of time that they've had available to them to do
so. And so we have put an option on the table, we are
requiring them to pay for it,
and we will be putting in place a regulatory obligation, which makes it incredibly
clear that it is their job to fix this issue.
And if they don't, there's going to be hefty fines.
Supplementary. Yep.
And
thank you, Minister.
I appreciate the minister's
clear indication of heavy intervention in the electricity sector.
And given the government's willingness to intervene,
why would the government not intervene in building the geothermal
we know we can build, in supporting the biomass options that we
know are there, in supporting the solarization, massive
solarization that are already there?
If the government's willing to intervene, why has the government taken
off the table all of the other options and focused on
fossil fuels?
Well, we want to have an option which ultimately delivers in a
timely manner to address the dry year risk, and that was a key
criteria in the options analysis.
Now, if it was to build a significant,
to have solar. Well, solar does not provide electricity
with batteries, which can currently get you through a
three-month dry year winter.
That option's not available to us at this stage.
Battery technology is good at intraday peaks.
Soon it'll be good at day to day and maybe even longer, but that's
not an option which is currently available to us today.
We have the gas-fired generation plant sitting idle
whilst we do not have the gas available to necessarily
make sure we can-- that's exactly what happened in 2024.
We were running the coal Rankines,
but we didn't have the gas to be able to fit the gap.
And so we're looking at the reality of our energy system today,
the kit that's available, and also
looking at how can we solve this in a timely manner.
And we have to make decisions, and we have to make those in a way that is in the
best interest of the New Zealand economy. That is exactly what we've done.
A supplementary one.
Supplementary, yes.
Supplementary, yep.
So
there's the one-off $4 million adjustment to utilize
underspends in the Getty Fund.
... is put forward for offshore renewable energy regulator revenue risk and the
liquefied natural gas procurement process costs.
How much of that NZ$4
million is going to LNG procurement?
Well, look, there is a cost to, obviously, the procurement process.
We can come back to you in writing with that specific answer to that question.
That's very good. Yeah. We have a supplementary from Dr.
David Wilson.
Yes. Minister, thank you.
Very complete. Talking about the gas transformation is really interesting in
light of
Mr. Willis's previous questions. We have options.
We've got electrifying of residential business, got geothermal,
got biomass and so on. But a couple of the businesses I've been
at just recently say, "Actually, it's almost impossible for us to
electrify. We already have solar for parts of our business, but the other
part we need gas for the right heat at the right time."
So do you think that there's an option here for us to tailor the
gas, LNG, towards firming energy to support those
businesses, mainly dairy?
So what we've said as part of the negotiation between MV,
NIFCo and the generator retailers is that part of the funding model
should allow for a user pays element for those who wish to
access
gas, but they would have to pay for that as part of that
agreement.
Ultimately,
the budget also funds the gas transition loan
scheme,
or guarantee scheme, and that's designed to support businesses that
can transition.
But also, one of the requirements or the...
So it's transition from gas to another form of energy, but it also enables
companies who want to invest in kit which
may reduce the amount of gas that they use.
So more modern and more efficient
equipment as well. So I think the minimum reduction in gas use is
15%. So if they can demonstrate that, then that
eligibility criteria is there for them.
So the point of that is to support businesses and industries and
to be able to look at what they can do to necessarily move from one to the other
or reduce the amount that they consume.
But while I acknowledge there are many businesses out there which don't necessarily
have options that are readily available to them today,
and that is a
significant reality for industrial base of New Zealand right now.
And the way that the energy market currently works without LNG, the options
for the gentailers is effectively either
to scoop up what they can from lots of
small businesses, which will, in the absence of methanex, if that
was to happen,
their options are to either scoop up what's left from small businesses and shut
those businesses,
or for electricity prices to go to record highs, which will shut down a whole bunch
of other businesses. That is economic carnage.
That is demand destruction.
That is the de-industrialization of New Zealand.
And so the choices that we have in front of us are stark.
They're
challenging choices, but as a government, we have to act in the best interest of
New Zealand.
Right. A supplementary, Dr. Vanisa Vini.
And thank you, Minister.
Mr. Willis mentioned around large scale solar and
geothermal. Have you had any advice about the rates and the amount of uptake
of solar and other sustainable things like geothermal?
Yeah. So we are seeing a significant investment in
the pipeline of renewable energy at the
moment in New Zealand.
And I think that is a good thing. We're seeing a significant increase in
what's being constructed and, as I said in my opening remarks,
the government's fast track
legislation is a part of our government's agenda to make it easier to
build the generation that New Zealand needs.
We've recently seen a new wind farm at the bottom of the
South Island, I think it's the largest wind farm in New Zealand's history,
just recently received fast track consent,
which is significant. There's a pipeline of
geothermal, wind, solar, battery
underway at the moment. Total forward pipeline, I understand,
between '26 and '29 is about
11 terawatt hours of consented generation projects in the pipeline with more than
3.5 terawatt hours in construction right now.
Fantastic.
And so there is a significant pipeline
currently underway,
and that is growing as fast track continues to deliver more
projects to the market.
And so we're seeing that flow through as part of the government's plan.
And I think an important point, the correlation with LNG and the
price of LNG is that
the
renewables will always be cheaper to run, and that means it will
always be cheaper to build, and LNG ultimately
supports that build-out because it means that when the wind's not blowing, the
sun's not shining, there is that backup generation
available and it gives people who are building renewable
intermittent generation confidence that they can have the
backup generation that they need, which gives them the confidence to build it.
A supplementary from Honorable Megan Woods.
Thank you. Just to finish up on the LNG stuff from me.
Minister, you talk about
this being now a charge on the electricity
companies, not a
levy on consumers. So what are the specific mechanisms
that you're going to put in place to ensure that the power companies don't pass
this on to their consumers, be it residential or industrial?
Well, ultimately, managing the dry year risk is part and parcel of
what a major electricity
generator, retailer should be doing, is part of
running their business. And what they have been doing over the last number of
years, because the dry year risk has not been solved, is they have been
passing that on to consumers with the price
of electricity being around $30 to $50 a- A megawatt
hour more expensive than the long-run marginal cost of
production. And so they have the reality of not fixing this problem,
is that the externalizing of that problem
to the households and businesses of New Zealand
who have been paying the price of this problem not being fixed.
So-
So we have been paying the price of this problem not being fixed.
And ultimately what we will see, and what we have seen, is
through this decision already being made, is downward pressure on power prices.
This is part of what the gentailers should be doing as part of
managing their business, and we expect them to do that.
So there's no specific measures to-
Well, down-
... increase the... Sorry, I'll just finish the question.
There's no specific measures to increase the powers for the EA
in terms of enforceability because, a number of analysts are
saying it's not the LNG decision, it's not the downward pressure, it's the
lakes are full.
Mm.
The sun's been shining, there's more generation coming on stream.
There's a range of things that come in and shows the danger of correlation and
causation muddling.
Well-
But I'm just clarifying, you don't have, in this year's work program, any
specific measures to stop that passing?
We are significantly increasing the powers in terms of the ability-
But beyond that
... for that, for the Electricity Authority to hold the major
gentailers accountable with significant increased fines, something that you failed
to do when you were the minister.
Okay. So just the last-
Okay, I guess I'll finish up
... the last wrap on this.
All right.
So, Minister, the government sits on two sides of the announcement,
the June 9 package.
So there's the proceeding with the procurement of the LNG
terminal, then there's also the Winter Energy Reliability option,
which requires large market participants to secure long-duration
firm energy. Now, obviously in terms of the mixed
ownership model companies, some very technical questions come
into play here. So I'm just wondering what advice the minister
has received around being a 51%
shareholder in those gentailers, and what steps
are being taken or what advice that he's received to ensure
that steps are taken to ensure they're not sitting on both sides
of the commercial arrangement, and whether or not there'll be related
party disclosures that will be required and the rights
of the minority shareholders in those companies.
Well, I'm acting as the Minister of Energy in relation to the
decisions that were announced on the-
Absolutely
... Tuesday the 9th-
Yeah
... of June.
In terms of related party disclosures that
the MOM companies have to make, obviously if
that came into effect, they would have to give effect to those related party
disclosure rules.
So that would mean that the 49% of shareholders would get to
vote on whether or not this proceeds and the Crown would have to step aside?
Well, there are rules in place when it comes to related party disclosures, and
ultimately those rules are set as part of their trading
obligations.
As Minister of Energy though, I've been clear about the approach that we're taking.
We have entered into negotiations
between MB and NIFCO and the gentailers.
And also the point of the winter
reliability obligations is very clearly about saying, as Minister of
Energy, that the dry year risk sits
with these companies to manage and to ensure that
they address the risk that they have failed to do.
Have you had legal advice?
In terms of?
In terms of
you being on both sides of this equation, in terms of the Crown-
Well, as I'm here as-
... being on both sides. Of the Crown being on both sides of the equation, of
being a 51% shareholder and also making
policy that is basically directing to a commercial
decision.
So I've received advice around related party disclosures, or related
party transactions.
In terms of
what I'm doing as the Minister of Energy though, is very clearly about putting the
obligation where it should have always been, and setting
policy in place
which provides for that.
Will you release that advice?
Well, look, I've received advice and it's subject to the
Official Information Act.
But the committee could request it.
All right. Okay.
Yeah.
So Scott Willis, New Plymouth.
Thank you. And, Minister, the price volatility of
LNG wasn't modeled as part of MB's assessment of the
suitability of an LNG import terminal.
So I wonder if you could explain why that wasn't the
case and what you think the impact of the high
volatility of LNG might have on households, given that there will be
a pass-through some way through to
households.
Well, we've looked at the forward prices, and we've looked at,
obviously, the impact of the situation in the Middle East
and the implications of that.
And what we've seen and what the International Energy Agency says is
that the
forward prices show that the price comes down very quickly back within the
range that we set when we agreed to this as in the initial
cabinet decisions and in what's been released.
And the International Energy Agency has pointed out
that the amount of LNG that's coming online
over the next three to four years well exceeds what has been disrupted through
the war
in the Middle East. And so,
we have obviously looked at that particular issue.
In terms of volatility, in terms of prices,
we rely on coal
significantly. We're one of the few countries in the world which is transitioning
from diesel to coal,
but we rely on coal,
and that also has its own price volatilities.
It's also from one single market, one country,
and so there's obviously risks there as well.
And Genesis as the importer- Of that
coal has to manage those risks, and I think does manage
those risks through normal
commercial management of price volatility, which
we would expect would be done in this case, too.
And Minister, there's been numerous Official Information
Act requests to MB on LNG from multiple organizations
that have always been answered significantly overdue.
Are you concerned
that this is giving the impression that MB's keeping
inconvenient information out of the public arena until
decisions are made, until we've already decided that this is where we're
going?
Well, my expectation is that MB operates within the
requirements under the Official Information Act.
Even though they're overdue?
No. Well, my expectation is that they give effect to the
Official Information Act.
I'm happy to have a look into that. If there's been some
delays in responses, I'm happy to have a look into that.
Good. That's good.
I've got a new line.
Yeah, new primary.
So was picking up on the de-industrialization
arguments that the minister is putting up as the case for doing this.
The concept modeling
makes the case not only would LNG cost New Zealand more than it saves,
but it also makes the case that the de-industrialization argument
doesn't stack up. It makes the point that the clearest
candidates to exit New Zealand and rather to switch to alternative fuels
are gas-intensive, trade-exposed industries, but for most of these,
gas is a minority fuel.
So it doesn't really see that as rescuing the case.
Probably wood processing is one of the industries that we've
seen
hardest hit in terms of closures over the
last couple of years. We've had Genesis Energy at
select committee making the case for setting up the
supply chain
for biomass, whether that either be torrefied
pellets or for
just chip in terms of that. Has the minister seen
that advice from concept on de-industrialization?
I'm not sure if I've seen that particular advice, but I have seen, obviously,
there's a range of perspectives
in terms of that issue. But what I have seen was what
I experienced when I was the Minister of Energy in 2024 and
what happened that year because the dry year risk wasn't managed.
It was a significant closures of firms.
We saw prices go to
significant heights.
And actually, from my perspective, that's not something that we as a government
want to see happen. So if the member's advocating for ignoring the
problem
and kicking the can down the road, which seems to be the approach of the Labor
Party,
then she's very much on the side of shutting down businesses,
shutting down jobs, and putting our economy at risk.
It's not something that I'm prepared to do.
Would note that when we made the announcement last week,
a major energy users group said the government's package represented a
significant step towards addressing long-standing concerns about New Zealand's
energy security.
That's something which we agree with.
The
BusinessNZ Energy Council Director of Advocacy, Catherine Beard, said LNG was a
solution which can likely be implemented at pace to address immediate dry year
concerns. So I think the voices of business are very much on the side
of making a decision and moving forward at pace
in order to reduce the risk that they see their business is exposed to.
Minister, your-
Carrie, Carrie
I'll just ask a sup on that. But yeah, Minister, your officials have
advice,
and no doubt have been briefing you that this is going to cost New Zealand more
than it saves and
de-industrialization
isn't an argument-
I'll have to ask-
... that can put in place of that. One of the things that I'd be
interested whether the minister has asked for any advice about the
impact of the decision to go ahead with LNG on the balance of payment.
We have clear choices. Far from saying that we should do nothing, I
agree with the problem definition.
I think there are alternatives that doesn't lock New Zealand into a
highly volatile, high-cost pathway.
If we look, for example, at using biomass in Huntly,
that we have the opportunity to create jobs here in New Zealand rather
than
relying on imported fossil fuels from other
economies. What we do know from the concept consulting
modeling is the impact on the balance of payments over
time, and has the minister asked for advice what that will
be, rather than creating homegrown energy solutions that create
jobs and opportunities here in New Zealand, but instead
wanting to subcontract that out to the rest of the world?
I'll ask Nick to speak to the issue.
So on the overall, how MB is taking into account these different models,
we haven't looked at just one. That there are different modeling that
find different things, and so we've looked across those.
And so our judgment around the gap of around three
terawatt hours is based on a number of different sources, and a lot of that
was in the business case late last year.
To this issue on gas price and so on, there was some
recent analysis that was commissioned by the Gas Industry Corporation that
PwC did. In fact, that showed that under LNG,
prices for gas would be lower because of gas going
down so quickly, and the demand
unable to transition fast enough.
So we are concerned about the ability for industry to transition in time and
for the electricity system to transition in time.
And so that's the basis of our, we do see
the need for this, and that's why the-
It's just-
You know, that range of analysis. It's not just one.
We've looked across to take into account what we think is a fair reflection.
So, thank you for that. In terms of the economic analysis,
obviously,
the Concepts modeling that you commissioned was quite
comprehensive.
Not all of it was made public. Will you now release all of
that Concept modeling that was provided to
MB?
We're happy to have a look at it then.
I'm not sure of the exact reasons that we are sharing.
Do you want to
cover that?
What?
So we released all of the Concept modeling that we
relied upon. So we commissioned Concept to do modeling to understand the
price effects on the spot market of with or without
LNG, and that was the modeling that we released in February
this year.
Just this week, after some OIA requests, we released
what is a draft slide pack. So that was never a
finalized report. That was a slide pack that was the
means of MBIE and Concept communicating kind of draft
findings as they came through,
and material has been redacted
under the Official Information Act.
So this is the-
And we're comfortable with the-
Yeah. But the pack that you're referring to is the one that
puts the cost to the New Zealand economy of $6.2 billion.
You might be referring to the recent gas report
in front of you.
Yeah.
Which was not the... No, that report was not done for MBIE.
Right.
That report was done of Concept's own bat.
Yeah.
MBIE has purchased a copy of it.
Mm-hmm.
And we are currently working through with
Concept some of our concerns about their assumptions. So we're in the process.
We think there were some overly optimistic assumptions about the way the
gas market works.
So have you briefed the minister on that report?
No, we have not.
Has the minister had a copy? Has he asked for a copy?
He's asked-
Because by the-
He asked us yesterday for us to brief him this week, and so we will be doing so.
When did you receive it?
I received the updated report last week.
Right.
All right. Scott Willis, you have a supplementary?
With the rates.
Or is that a new one?
Yes, apparently some dodgy con-- dodgy assumptions as well, which I think that-
Yeah. Supplementary.
Have you...
Were you looking at environmental emissions relating considerations
in the procurement process? Is this part of the procurement
process that you're undertaking?
In the procurement processes underway, and it's looking at
the
3 PJ, or sorry, 12 PJ that's required over a period of three
months in order to provide the three, the one and a half
terawatt-hours of gas
that's needed in order to be able to
meet the
dry year risk. We've also, obviously, there's a
timeliness element to it. We need to make sure this is in place rapidly
by winter 2028, which is pretty key in order to be able
to support the New Zealand economy in the eventuation of a dry
year in that year.
And so those are the key
parts of the procurement process.
So that's a no.
Well, we're procuring a piece of infrastructure effectively.
That's what we're procuring.
Obviously, the
use of the gas is a different
part of the equation. But what we're currently going through is a procurement for
the infrastructure. So if you're talking about construction emissions,
I don't think that's a key criteria.
Right.
Yeah.
Would you like-- Well, I mean, are you suggesting things should be built out of
wood?
Great idea.
Okay.
Okay. So do you have a question? Oh. No, thank you. Yeah, no new primary for you?
No new primary. I'm there. Okay.
Supplementary.
You have a new primary, is it?
Supplementary, Dr. David Wilson. Yeah.
I'm interested in the timing issues that we're talking about some of these other
alternative energy,
such as geothermal, torrefied wood pellets, which is largely
unproven,
and the like. What are we dealing with here?
Because obviously what we're talking about with LNG is filling that gap.
So can you sort of elucidate on what some of those issues are with transition-
Well, I think, I mean, there's a number-- No, I mean, it's a good question.
I mean, there's a number of issues that we're having to work through, and I think
some people say, "Well, we could transition Genesis to biomass." And
I think, I mean, Genesis is definitely doing some work in that space.
But Genesis still only has three Rankines, which can produce 750
megawatts of electricity.
Once those are firing at all full capacity,
that doesn't... Which is effectively what the coal stockpile
enables.
Mm.
That only covers half of our half of the energy needs, and so therefore, you still
need other kits to be able to deliver
more
energy into the market. And so that either means using existing
capacity, which is gas-fired turbines, which we have at Huntly,
or in other parts of the country. Just don't necessarily have the gas to be able to
use them.
Or you have to construct new infrastructure,
new kit to be able
to burn it. And so,
all of those solutions are potentially longer term solutions.
But a key criteria is being able to do something quickly, because
the reality is a dry year comes about,
on average, every four years. We don't have the luxury of time.
We don't have the luxury to wait till 2037 to build a lake at the bottom of South
Island. We don't have the luxury to wait for new technologies.
But over time, those technologies will become more proven.
They will become Um,
cheaper or more cost-effective or more
available. But in the meantime, we have to make a decision which
ultimately protects our New Zealand economy.
Yeah.
Mm-hmm. A new primary from Scott Ellis.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I'd just like to switch to energy hardship
space, because we've seen a 300,000 cap from
this year's budget for the appropriation titled Assisting Households in Energy
Hardship,
and I'm assuming that's the support for energy education and communities
bit. And we've seen in Budget '24 a cut
of 1.5 million, the same program.
In Budget '24, there was also the cut for community-focused outreach
programs to target the hard-to-reach households.
Now, we know that there are over 600,000 households in
energy hardship
from data that was presented at the Hidden Energy Hardship Hui
recently, and these are people who are really, really struggling.
Given energy hardship is something that has
risen and is growing under this government, what
impact is Budget 2026 cuts to
energy hardship support, what impact will that have on affected
households, on those 600,000 households already in
energy hardship?
Well, there's a number of things that the government is doing to put
downward pressure on power prices.
The first one is around security of supply.
Ultimately, that is critically important if we are going to have a market which
provides affordable and abundant energy for New Zealanders.
We need to make sure that we are doing that.
EECA obviously has the
support for energy education and community, which provides funding to organizations
that offer specialist energy advice and education to households.
That plays a really important role.
They have other advice and support to businesses in energy
efficiency and energy use.
That plays an important role.
The Electricity Authority has recently launched its new comparison in
switching site, Billy,
which gives consumers a simple way to check their plan and make sure they're
getting the best deal, and I think that's a really important tool.
Sarah can correct me if I'm wrong, but I think it's on average
a couple of hundred dollars of savings to the consumer over the course of a
year from actually making sure they're on the right plan.
And so that tool has been
launched, and I encourage people to use it.
Cabinet has also agreed to progress open electricity under Consumer Product Data
Act to make it even easier for customers to compare electricity plans and make the
best decisions for their households.
So there's a number of things the government's doing in order
to support
customers and support consumers and provide a more competitive
market. Of course, the Winter Energy Payment is available to
those on
either
superannuitants or those on benefits.
And that plays a really important role to make sure that
people who need that support the most, it's a targeted intervention to support
those people who need that support the most, and
that's in place from the 1st of May to the 1st of October to
anyone receiving a main benefit pension or job seeker support.
So there's a range of different initiatives in place to provide support to those
who need it the most.
And supplementary. So
while it may be a relatively small budget cut in this
greater scheme of things, that the little bit that went to the
support for energy education and communities
really was one of those key bits of funding that went
to get to those hard-to-reach households, and the minister may well
assume that everyone is literate on computers and able
to access all kinds of information.
But really, the type of households and the people
we're dealing with are people who are really struggling, who may not have a
computer in their house, who may have
holes in the walls, who really do need whanau
help and whanau navigation through these programs.
And that's the type of program that has now been cut through
funding. What does the minister think we can do to
help those people who are really,
really struggling, hard to reach, and-
Well,
I-
... can't afford to heat their home to a healthy level and then become
clients of our health system?
Yeah. So the Energy Efficiency and Conservation Authority does
deliver programs in that space and will continue to provide programs in
that space. But I put it to you,
the retailers also have an obligation to make sure that they are doing
their bit to provide information to their customers,
and I encourage them to
do their part to provide
information and support to their customers.
They also have an obligation in this space, and I encourage them to pull their
weight.
Supplementary.
Supplementary, yeah.
So will the minister
work with the retailers to
seek,
from the four retailers, at least $5 million per
retailer
annually to put into a fund to work with those hard-to-reach households?
Well, I agree.
This is something that I think they're open to, and it would be
helpful if we could have some bipartisan support on this.
Well, I agree they should be doing more.
Okay, so supplementary from Honorable Murphy.
Thank you.
One of the long-term programs that we've had to
help households in energy hardships heat their homes is
Warmer Kiwi Homes, and I note that there's no funding for the
program in the budget beyond '27/'28. Is that correct?
Yeah. It was a funding cliff put in place by the previous government
So, but this government hasn't put any additional funding in, in the
three budgets that it's produced to extend that out?
No. So it's a funding cliff put in place by the previous government.
So but there's been three budgets, um, that this government has
produced, and no additional funding has been put into Warmer Kiwi
Homes, but and is not in this budget.
Just so my understanding is it's, uh, it was time-limited funding put in place.
No. No, it needed to be topped up in subsequent budgets.
It's choices governments make. But there actually was a cut to Warmer Kiwi
Homes, to funding from Warmer Kiwi Homes in this year's budget as
part of the energy funding reprioritization package.
That's around, I think it was $8.5 million, um-
It was a-
... from memory
...
uh, there was, um, s- an operational underspend from, from ECA.
It was not funding which was allocated to the actual delivery of the services.
It was an operational funding, operational funding of ECA's, from ECA's
baseline.
So given there is no funding beyond
2027-
Yeah
... um, for this program, was any consideration given by you, Minister,
uh, to put that underspend into the program so we could have more
homes be insulated?
Uh, we've made, uh, choices around reprioritization, and obviously one of the
initiatives that we have put funding towards has been the Solar on Schools program,
which is going to deliver solar panels on schools for around 500 schools
across New Zealand, which I think is a really positive, um, step forward.
And we've made-
Oh, don't disagree. I'm interested in people's homes-
We've made-
... and insulation of people's homes-
And we've made-
... with this question
... and we've made choices to put that funding towards, uh, some of the underspends
towards some of those initiatives.
That funding, my understanding, came from the reprioritization out of giddy.
I'm talking about the 8.5 million that's been taken out of Warmer Kiwi Homes
back into, into the general pot, and whether or not the minister
gave any consideration, given he couldn't secure additional
funding to continue this program beyond
'27/28, whether he gave any consideration to
putting that into further in- insulations of New
Zealanders who are struggling with their power bills-
Yeah, so the-
... and can't heat their homes
... so this, this budget continues funding for that, uh, for the
Warmer Kiwi Homes, uh, initiative.
Obviously, there are decisions that will need to be made in future budgets around,
uh, around the next steps. Um, but the underspend that the
member is talking about was operational costs
for, from ECA's baseline. Um, and uh,
the savings in total from underspends around giddy, operational
costs for Warmer Kiwi Homes, and discontinued-
Yeah
... crown funding for Ara Ake-
Under source
... come to, I think, around $57.35, uh, two
million over the forecast period.
Given that there is no funding for Warmer Kiwi Homes beyond
'27/28, and this is the first time in decades, this is a
program that has been supported by governments on all sides of the
house. So this is a first, that we've seen a government not put
support into the ins- insulation scheme.
But it's funded in this budget.
Um, it i- it is, it is funding that was already there, additional funding.
What we have seen is over decades, that governments have made
budget decisions to extend the Warmer Kiwi Homes out.
It's exactly the same program that we inherited when we came into government and
decided to keep funding in budgets that we delivered.
So what I'm interested in, has the minister received advice,
um, around alternatives if the Warmer Kiwi Homes program is
discontinued, about how support will be
given to households that are struggling to heat their
homes, to insulate their homes, and to pay their power bills?
Yeah, so the funding is in this budget for that program.
Um, so-
Through to '27/'28, but there is no funding beyond that.
So-
So, uh, what I want to know is a part of the advice-
It's always been-
... whether you've got alternatives.
Yes. The fund- the funding is in that, uh, in, in the budget to continue the
program. Obviously, future budgets will need to consider, uh, the
fact that it, uh, you know, the next steps around, uh, this particular program
and the options around, uh, and that advice will be forthcoming.
Um, the point is that the funding is there for, in this budget,
for that program. The underspend is from operational sources.
Okay. Uh, any more? Scott Willis.
Thank you. Um, given that, uh, ECA's taken over Ara
Ake's responsibilities,
what, what organizational changes is ECA making to, to make
sure that the innovation that was sustained by Ara Ake,
New Zealand's Energy Innovation Center, will, will continue?
And I'm thinking there of the flex, hosting the Flex Forum-
Mm-hmm
... the, um, annual energy hardship hui, multi-trader
relationships, those, those types of, that type of work that was
happening with Ara Ake. What, what is going to happen now
that it's moved to a different organization?
Yeah, so I can ask, um, CEO of ECA to speak to that.
Okay.
Good afternoon, scrutiny committee.
Mm-hmm.
So I'm Marcus Palener, CEO of ECA. We are in
direct conversations with Ara Ake.
I met with the CEO last week.
Uh, basically they want to wrap things up
under their own steam and then, uh, hand that over to us
in a tidy way. So there's been no immediate decisions
made because we're in conversations with Ara Ake.
Expect to have those conversations over the next few months.
Thank you.
Okay. Good. All good, Scott?
Mm. Um-
You can send some written questions later.
We've got a lot of questions-
Uh, no. One, one more little-
Yep
... yeah, so, so, um, given there's the Solar on Schools,
which has come out of Ara Ake, um, program,
it's a really
positive step and why would, A, question one,
why would we not go further? Why wouldn't we not put solar on every single school?
And secondly, is there any work underway,
perhaps it's with the Electricity Authority, to think about the, the-
That the actual cost of transmitting those
electrons locally rather than the cost
that we have or the value that's given to
locally produced electrons. Is there any work underway
to ensure that we can have peer-to-peer
sharing of electricity, given that we will have schools in our
communities that are
not used at weekends
and during the summer period when we will have the greatest solar
production?
So in terms of the first part, so the first part of that question,
500 schools is what the funding that we have allocated enables,
which I think is a great start. I think there's obviously
future opportunity, which would be a question for future budgets.
Future governments.
In terms of the second part to your question, I will ask the CE
of the Electricity Authority to speak to that.
Cool.
Thanks. Good afternoon, everyone.
In terms of your question about what I think you're talking about really is
innovation and what some of the new ways or the new
models might be. And as you may be aware,
the Electricity Authority, so we're responsible for the rules of the system, and
sometimes those rules
need to be updated to keep pace with what's changing and new business models, new
innovations. We really want to see consumers get the benefit of
anything new that might
ultimately help drive down total system
costs. So what we want to achieve is reliable electricity at lowest possible cost
for consumers, and new business models can deliver that.
And so one of the things we've done in the last few years, is establish
what we call the Power Innovation Pathway, which is a way for some of those
innovators to come in and engage with us.
That helps inform the rules and whether we need to change the rules, in quite
specific ways to accommodate things,
that might be in the long term beneficial for consumers.
So, a shorter answer to your question, I suppose is yes, there is all
sorts of work underway,
and we can provide more information about specific programs of work.
Maybe we sup on that. So 2019, there was the
Network Transformation Roadmap, which was a fantastic document.
Yes.
Lovely words, but very little action in the
EDBs. What powers does the
EA have to compel the EDBs
to be consumer-centric as they said they would
back in 2019, consumer-centric in a way that will
enable those peer-to-peer sharing of
electricity, the use of those local electrons to
make the grid much more
resilient but also more flexible, more dynamic?
This is a topic we could talk about for quite some time, but I don't think that's
the intention.
So, first of all, your question is about what powers we have to compel the EDB.
So as a regulator, we are able to make rules for participants in the system that
they have to comply with. And so electricity distribution businesses, lines
companies, are participants in the system, so they are subject to the rules when we
make them.
That's the first point. I think the second thing that you'd be aware of is that,
working closely with the Commerce Commission and EECA,
we have written to electricity distribution businesses
encouraging the sorts of things that we want to see.
And I'm aware also that the minister has previously written to electricity
distribution businesses with the expectations.
So there's a range of things
that regulators and government can do to encourage the sort of behavior we want to
see in the long run.
One tiny-
One final question.
I am aware that you have some powers.
I do remember
an advisory group, the Innovation Participation Advisory Group, some years ago, put
a recommendation forward that boards of EDBs be compelled to
demonstrate
innovation
and be sanctioned if they could not demonstrate innovation.
Now, that was a report produced within the EA.
Mm-hmm.
Did it go anywhere?
Well, so I think you were a member of the advisory group at the
time. And so it was an independent advisory group to the
Electricity Authority.
That advice has informed our work over the last few years,
in terms of, I suppose, encouraging EDBs to
innovate. Some of the things I've talked about are partly that.
There's also the Commerce Commission's regime, which I'm certainly not going to
try and explain. That's not my
remit, but that also has mechanisms to try and encourage innovation.
What we want to see ultimately is that lower system cost, and so that can include
things like
non-network solutions that help provide...
Ultimately, they can avoid the cost of network build
and those sorts of things I think we all want to see as ways to
reduce the total system cost and benefit everyone.
Yeah. So, members, we don't have enough time left for any more questions.
So thank you so much, Minister.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you, everybody.